Kafka Node Pools: Storage & Scheduling (#381)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2023-08-23-kafka-node-pools-storage-and-scheduling.md

---
layout: post
title: "Kafka Node Pools: Storage & Scheduling"
date: 2023-08-23
author: jakub_scholz
---

Another two areas where Kafka Node Pools might be helpful is around storage and its management, and scheduling of pods.
And in this third blog post in our series about node pools, we will look into these areas in more detail.

<!--more-->

_This post is part of a bigger series about Kafka Node Pools.

> The other parts published so far are:_

Author: I updated the other articles as well.

            nodeSelectorTerms:
              - matchExpressions:
                - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
                  operator: In
                  values:
                  - zone1
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-zone2
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 4
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 1Ti
        class: all-zones
  template:
    pod:
      affinity:
        nodeAffinity:
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
            nodeSelectorTerms:
              - matchExpressions:
                - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
                  operator: In
                  values:
                  - zone2
  # ...
```

And as a result, Strimzi will deploy 2 brokers in the `zone1` availability zone and 4 in the `zone2`.
No special storage configuration is needed anymore.

### Conclusion

In this blog post, we covered a few other situations where node pools make your life easier.
If you think that some of them were niche issues that do not affect all users, you are probably right.

> But don't worry, next week we will have a look at something important for everyone.
> We will look at what role node pools play in Strimzi's support for KRaft / ZooKeeper-less Kafka.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But don't worry -- in the next post in this series on node pools we delve into something important for all Strimzi users.
We will look at what role node pools play in Strimzi's support for KRaft / ZooKeeper-less Kafka.
```

kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: brokers
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  roles:
    - broker
  replicas: 3
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 1Ti
        class: gp2-ebs
  # ...
```

To migrate to the new storage, we have to first create a new node pool that uses the new storage type:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: brokers-gp3
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  roles:
    - broker
  replicas: 3
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 1Ti
        class: gp3-ebs
  # ...
```

Once the new brokers are deployed and ready, we can use Cruise Control and the `KafkaRebalance` resource to move everything from the old brokers to the new brokers:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaRebalance
metadata:
  name: my-rebalance
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/rebalance-auto-approval: "true"
spec:
  mode: remove-brokers
  brokers: [0, 1, 2] # Use the node IDs of the existing brokers
  # ...
```

> Now we have to wait until Cruise Control executes the rebalance for us.

Reviewer 2: Can we include a snippet of what the finished state looks like from the CR? Or a `kubectl wait` comment or something just to make this _wait until_ step more concrete?

```
kubectl delete knp brokers
```

You can use the same steps to shrink storage as well.

### Pod scheduling in node pools

Scheduling Kafka pods to worker nodes in a Kubernetes cluster seems to be completely unrelated to storage.
But in some situations, they are closely related.
The persistent volumes sometimes have their own affinity.
For example, local persistent volumes can be used only within the worker node where they exist.
In some cases, the volumes might be available only in a particular availability zone or region.
This applies for example to Amazon AWS Elastic Block Storage.
In these situations, the choice of storage directly impacts the Kubernetes worker to which the Kafka pods can be scheduled.

Strimzi already allowed configuration of pod scheduling before node pools were introduced.
You can configure affinity, topology spread constraints, or tolerations in the `Kafka` custom resource.
But these rules always apply to all Kafka nodes.
So you could not easily configure a 6-node Kafka cluster where nodes 0 and 1 run in one availability zone and nodes 2, 3, 4, and 5 run in a second zone.

> Configurations like this can be especially useful if you don't have 3 availability zones or data centers and have to run your Apache Kafka cluster in only 2 or 2,5 availability zones or data centers.

Reviewer 2: `2,5` will be confusing to non-Europeans. Maybe use 2½?

            nodeSelectorTerms:
              - matchExpressions:
                - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
                  operator: In
                  values:
                  - zone1
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-zone2
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  replicas: 4
  storage:
    type: jbod
    volumes:
      - id: 0
        type: persistent-claim
        size: 1Ti
        class: all-zones
  template:
    pod:
      affinity:
        nodeAffinity:
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
            nodeSelectorTerms:
              - matchExpressions:
                - key: topology.kubernetes.io/zone
                  operator: In
                  values:
                  - zone2
  # ...
```

And as a result of this configuration, Strimzi will deploy 2 brokers in the `zone1` availability zone and 4 in `zone2`.
No special storage configuration is needed anymore.

### Conclusion

In this blog post, we covered a couple of situations where node pools make your life easier.
If you think that they were niche issues that do not affect all users, you are probably right.

> But don't worry -- in the next post in this series on node pools we delve into something important for all Strimzi users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But don't worry -- in the next post in this series on node pools we will delve into something important for all Strimzi users.
```
